# Evaluating urban butterfly (Superfamily Papilionoidea) diversity using a community science approach

Kayleigh Tooke, to complete the requirements for BIOL490 at Concordia University

## Abstract
Urbanisation threatens biodiversity, particularly for butterfly populations, because of habitat modification and unsustainable green space management. The “Corridor écologique du Grand Sud-Ouest (CESO)” is a green infrastructure project that was carried out in the Sud-Ouest borough of Montreal, which aims to better support urban biodiversity. We assessed the effectiveness of three gardening plot designs (Floral, Shrubby, and Microforest) of the CESO in supporting butterfly diversity. Through the use of community science, events were organised to engage volunteers in butterfly monitoring during the summer of 2023. Despite challenges with weather contingencies and unpredictable attendance rates, the community science approach provided valuable insights into butterfly diversity. Adult butterfly richness and activity were assessed through timed count surveys, while larval butterfly richness was evaluated using area counts. Overall, the results point towards the Microforest plot design being the most effective at supporting higher butterfly richness and activity. While adult butterfly richness did not significantly differ across plot designs, Microforest plots exhibited more instances of both Plot Use and Flight activities. No larval butterflies were recorded, prompting a need for continued monitoring to assess long-term development of the project. The study emphasises the importance of vegetation diversity and the need to incorporate host plants and nectar plants in urban green projects to enhance butterfly diversity. Recommendations include planting more host plants tailored to local butterfly species and prioritising larger and more complex vegetation structures, such as the Microforest plots, to support butterfly populations.
